New guide - expanding persistent volumes (#500)
UKCloud/documentation: articles/openshift/oshift-how-expand-persistent-vols.md

---
title: How to expand OpenShift persistent volumes | UKCloud Ltd
description: Outlines methods to expand OpenShift persistent volumes in v3.11 OpenShift clusters.
services: openshift
author: Gareth Ellner
reviewer:
lastreviewed: 
toc_rootlink: How To
toc_sub1: 
toc_sub2:
toc_sub3:
toc_sub4:
toc_title: How to expand OpenShift persistent volumes
toc_fullpath: How To/oshift-how-expand-persistent-vols.md
toc_mdlink: oshift-how-expand-persistent-vols.md
---

# How to expand OpenShift persistent volumes

## Overview

> In OpenShift clusters running OpenShift v3.11 or later, it is possible to expand existing persistent volumes. It is necessary to shutdown any pod/container using the volume before the expansion can be performed. In earlier versions (such as v3.9) it is necessary to raise a support request so that UKCloud admins can facilitate the expansion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In OpenShift clusters running OpenShift v3.11 or later, it is possible to expand existing persistent volumes. It is necessary to scale-down any pod/container using the volume before the expansion can be performed. In earlier versions (such as v3.9) it is necessary to raise a support request so that UKCloud admins can facilitate the expansion.
```

>```
>$ oc version
>...
>Server https://console.5678-89abcd:8443
>openshift v3.11.51
>kubernetes v1.11.0+d4cacc0
>```

## Prerequisites

To complete the steps in this guide, you must have access to a cluster that is running OpenShift Container Platform v3.11 (or newer).

You must also have access to:

- `oc`, the OpenShift command-line client (CLI). For more information, see OpenShift's [*Get Started with the CLI*](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/3.11/cli_reference/get_started_cli.html)

If the cluster is v3.11 or newer, the storage class should be enabled for Volume Expansion - you can confirm this as follows:
```
$ oc describe storageclass tier2
Name:                  tier2
IsDefaultClass:        Yes
Annotations:           storageclass.beta.kubernetes.io/is-default-class=true
Provisioner:           kubernetes.io/cinder
Parameters:            availability=nova,type=TIER2
AllowVolumeExpansion:  True
MountOptions:          <none>
ReclaimPolicy:         Delete
VolumeBindingMode:     Immediate
Events:                <none>
```

## Stop any pod which is using the volume.

>[!INFO]

> >In this guide, we will expand the volume for cluster's default elasticsearch deployment which is located in the `openshift-logging` project. The pod using the persistent volume in this example is `logging-es-data-master` and the pvc (Persistent Volume Claim) name is `logging-es-0`. This is a common requirement - a large volume of logs may cause elasticsearch to fail when the logging volume fills up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>In this guide, we will expand the volume for a cluster's default Elasticsearch deployment which is located in the `openshift-logging` project. The pod using the persistent volume in this example is named `logging-es-data-master` and the pvc (Persistent Volume Claim) name is `logging-es-0`. This is a common scenario - a high throughput of logs may cause Elasticsearch to enter a CrashLoop when the logging volume fills up.
```

>
>The same procedure can be applied to any other pods which use persistent volumes.

```
$ oc project openshift-logging
Now using project "openshift-logging" on server "https://console.5678-89abcd:8443".
$ oc get pods
NAME                                      READY     STATUS      RESTARTS   AGE
logging-es-data-master-7bqadxxd-1-wrlqh   2/2       Running     2          2d
...
logging-kibana-1-n7j8t                    2/2       Running     2          2d
$ oc get dc
NAME                              REVISION   DESIRED   CURRENT   TRIGGERED BY
logging-es-data-master-7bqadxxd   1          1         1
logging-kibana                    1          1         1         config
```
>[!INFO] In this example, the `logging-kibana` pod depends on the `logging-es-data-master` pod so it is good practice to also scale this down during the expansion of the persistent volume for `logging-es-data-master`

> ```

Reviewer: Could we replace this example section with something similar to the below?

```
for i in $(oc get dc | awk 'NR>1 {print $1}') ; do oc scale --replicas=0 dc $i; done
deploymentconfig.apps.openshift.io/logging-kibana scaled
deploymentconfig.apps.openshift.io/logging-es-data-master-7bqadxxd scaled
```

This reduces the requirement to change the guide to match the es dc name

$ oc scale dc logging-kibana --replicas=0
deploymentconfig.apps.openshift.io/logging-kibana scaled
$ oc scale dc logging-es-data-master-7bqadxxd --replicas=0
deploymentconfig.apps.openshift.io/logging-es-data-master-7bqadxxd scaled
```
Confirm that the pod which uses the volume has been Terminated:
```
$ oc get pods | grep logging-es-data-master
# (nothing returned)
```

## Resize the persistent volume

Once the pod(s) dependent on the volume are stopped, we can edit the pvc to resize the volume.

```
$ oc get pvc
NAME           STATUS    VOLUME                                     CAPACITY   ACCESS MODES   STORAGECLASS   AGE
logging-es-0   Bound     pvc-4ad7258e-12a6-11e9-bc9d-fa163e12bba5   20Gi       RWO            tier2          2d
$ oc edit pvc logging-es-0
...
```

> `oc edit` causes the configuration of the object to open in a text editor. Edit the size in the `spec:` section only (do not touch the size listed under `status:`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`oc edit` causes the configuration of the object to open in a text editor. Edit the size with the `spec:` array only (do not touch the size listed under `status:`):
```

```
...
spec:
  accessModes:
  - ReadWriteOnce
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 30Gi   # (edited from 20Gi)
  storageClassName: tier2
...
```
When the edit is completed, the pvc will *continue to show the old size* but will be listed as being in a `FileSystemResizePending` state:
```

> oc describe pvc logging-es-0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ oc describe pvc logging-es-0
```

Name:          logging-es-0
Namespace:     openshift-logging
StorageClass:  tier2
Status:        Bound
Volume:        pvc-4ad7258e-12a6-11e9-bc9d-fa163e12bba5
Labels:        logging-infra=support
Annotations:   pv.kubernetes.io/bind-completed=yes
               pv.kubernetes.io/bound-by-controller=yes
               volume.beta.kubernetes.io/storage-provisioner=kubernetes.io/cinder
Finalizers:    [kubernetes.io/pvc-protection]
Capacity:      20Gi
Access Modes:  RWO
Conditions:
  Type                      Status  LastProbeTime                     LastTransitionTime                Reason  Message
  ----                      ------  -----------------                 ------------------                ------  -------
  FileSystemResizePending   True    Mon, 01 Jan 0001 00:00:00 +0000   Thu, 11 Apr 2019 17:43:26 +0000           Waiting for user to (re-)start a pod to finish file system resize of volume on node.
Events:                     <none>
```

> ## Restart the pod(s)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Scale-up the pod(s)
```

When the pod which uses the persistent volume is started, the persistent volume will be resized as it starts.

Since we scaled down the `logging-es-data-master` deployment and its dependent `logging-kibana` in this example, we will scale up both deployments.

> ```

Reviewer: Same as previous comment (https://github.com/UKCloud/documentation/pull/500/files#r278072241) could we use:

```
$ for i in $(oc get dc | awk 'NR>1 {print $1}') ; do oc scale --replicas=1 dc $i; done
deploymentconfig.apps.openshift.io/logging-kibana scaled
deploymentconfig.apps.openshift.io/logging-es-data-master-7bqadxxd scaled
```

$ oc scale dc logging-kibana --replicas=1
deploymentconfig.apps.openshift.io/logging-kibana scaled
$ oc scale dc logging-es-data-master-7bqadxxd --replicas=1
deploymentconfig.apps.openshift.io/logging-es-data-master-7bqadxxd scaled
```
Once the pod has started, we can check the filesystem has resized correctly by logging into the new pod and checking the mount point for the new size:
```

> oc rsh logging-es-data-master-7bqadxxd-1-7rb9x

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ oc rsh logging-es-data-master-7bqadxxd-1-7rb9x
```
